---
layout: page
title: Never punish honesty
permalink: /principles/never-punish-honesty
parent: Leadership Principles
---

# Never punish honesty

As a new engineering manager, I was taken aback when a direct report told me in a one-on-one that they didn't do much work the previous week. My instinctive response was to react, "What do you mean you didn't get anything done last week? How is that acceptable?" Thankfully, I caught myself.

In a fully remote environment, I recognized that I would have had little way to know in the short-term how productive the employee was on any given day, and this was them being voluntarily forthright--not boasting. I could also tell--although more subconsciously at the time--that this person was seeking help from me as a coach or mentor rather than punishment or affirmation from me as their boss. By responding negatively, I would have [undermined their trust](/principles/earn-trust), which wouldn't necessarily prevent them from doing it again, but it would make it much more likely that next time they wouldn't tell me. I realized in the moment that [I would rather know the unpleasant truth than believe a false reality](https://www.principles.com/principles/35488158-a0bc-47c0-bc89-050c036d995e/){:target="\_blank"}.

I was also taken aback at the bluntness of the statement and their boldness in telling me, as their manager. Instead of reacting, I leaned into my curiosity and asked questions to try to better understand the situation. _Why didn't this person do any work? Do they think that behavior is ok?_ By quickly reframing the conversation from, "This person did something bad" to, "This person is offering me information I don't have that can help me be more effective," I was able to shift from anger to gratitude. I responded with, "Thank you for trusting me enough to share that."

As manager, my role is to optimize the machine--not just on any given hour or day, but consistently, over the long-term. These are salaried employees, not hourly workers, and the work they do is highly technical and creative. They're not paid per hour in their seat because not all hours are equal. They're paid for the value they provide, and that value inevitably varies week to week. For a great employee, leaving early one day or being unproductive another comes out in the wash. There would certainly be future project deadlines that required the occasional late night--_there were, and when the time came, this person delivered_.

To my surprise, this was hardly the only example or even the only person who surprised me with such blunt feedback. Over the coming years, I sat through many similar (though less extreme) conversations where my reports volunteered similar feedback about mistakes they made and policies or values they violated, and I often found myself questioning whether I was right not to react in the moment. _I would never dream of telling my boss I didn't do any work last week. My boss would never tolerate that behavior. I shouldn't tolerate it either._ But I kept returning to the same internal question and conclusion: _Would I rather know or not know? The best way to optimize for knowing is to not punish their honesty._

The key point here is NOT to ignore or overlook bad behavior. It's to decouple giving the necessary corrective feedback or behavior modification from the point of receiving the other person's honest feedback. It's not either-or--it's both. But they don't have to take place in the same moment. When the other person is speaking, your job is to [listen to understand, not to respond](/principles/listen-to-understand). By not punishing their honesty, you can validate and strengthen the other person's trust so they will come to you again in the future. This lets you instead focus on gathering new information that will help you better understand reality and improve your ability to succeed in improving future behavior. It's also consistent with being a [continuous learning environment](/principles/continuous-learning) where past failures are learning opportunities rather than punishment opportunities. Remember, **the objective is to minimize future bad behavior--not to punish past bad behavior.**
